They had either the same name or similar names with people
that had some sort of a criminal record. If.
Somebody made a typo, when they put their,
their name in the system and mm-hmm <affirmative>, then they were,
they were made and knowledgeable.
And then there was also some concern that some of that was deliberate cause so
much of it was taking place in democratic districts. Mm-hmm <affirmative> yeah.
It's um,
it's very disconcerting the idea that someone would try to rig an
election. Yeah. I mean,
we would like to think that that is an absolutely unAmerican thing to think of,
but people can up with not American thing. It is,
but people can come up with very strange reasons for justification of very
awful acts. And this seems to be one of 'em they think their side is right.
Mm-hmm <affirmative>.
Well, that, that points to, um, the,
the super delegate issue that Democrats have been dealing with where
people who have been arguing to keep the system of super delegates,
where in a state like mine in Hawaii, for example,
we've got four super delegate votes, uh,
two for the members of Congress and two for the senators, explain.
That to people who don't know what a super delegate means. So.
This is something that is, um,
created by the political parties themselves. So the democratic party has,
has been using the super delegate system where, um,
as people are running for president, you have a certain number of,
of delegates that go to one person or another, uh,
based on that state's rules.
So some states say it's winner take all other states say that it's proportional.
So if you get 60% of the vote, that means you get 60% of the delegates,
but then you have the special category of super delegates,
which they're they're over 700 them. It includes all 435 members of,
of, or, sorry, all, um, democratic members of Congress,
Democrats in the Senate and people who are appointed by, uh,
the party leadership, both at the state and the national level. And so,
um, what we saw in, in, in my state of Hawaii for example,
is <affirmative> over 70% of the voters voted
for Bernie Sanders, but out of those four super delegate votes,
he got one which is mine.
So the super delegates don't have to cast their votes to reflect how the,
their constituents voted.
So how did the rest of them vote?
They voted for Hillary. So that puts you in a situation where,
and this is not about, well, Bernie would've won without Dale.
This is not even what that's about. This is about really looking at people,
casting their votes.
And then you have this special group of people who are either elected or
appointed who can then say, nah, I don't,
I don't agree with the way that the people in my state or my district voted.
So I'm just gonna vote the other way and then shift, uh,
potentially the outcome of that election for that state or for the country. So.
Did it shift it for Hawaii? Yeah.
Yeah. So Hillary won Hawaii's um, uh, super delegates,
but the people voted differently.
And it was 70% of the people voted. Yeah. For very.
It, it wasn't close. It was, it was, but she won the state. And that was how,
how you saw, um, that's. So in some states where, you know, I think,
I don't know, Vermont, there,
there were a few other states that I remember were looking at where, um,
when they were counting the votes as they were coming in,
they would report one number. But if Bernie won the state,
his number was zero.
And then there was a certain number that was already built in to Hillary's count
before the votes were even finally tallied because she had already had the
declare heard support of those super delegates within that state.
So the Republicans don't do this. I think they may have super delegates,
but those super delegates are required to, um,
reflect the votes of their constituency.
So they don't have the freedom to change their change,
their vote or change their mind. But, um, yeah,
this is, uh, this is, so this is something that I've been,
I've been fighting to,
to try to reform within our party is to get rid of super delegates,
to, uh,
make it so that we have open primaries so that you don't have to be a card
carrying party member to vote in democratic primary.
Cause that was another problem we saw across the country where people return and
away because in some cases, well, you didn't register with the party a year ago,
which is the requirement. And so, um,
have open primaries and then you have same day registration.
If you're not registered to vote,
you should be able to register to vote on the day of the election so that you
can participate in our democracy.
Those things seem so clear. Cut. It seems so hard dry, but the, the,
the super delicate issue in particular it's, that's so disturbing. Yeah,
that seems so dirty.
Yeah. So there's been some progress made since then, though,
just recently the DNC had a meeting where, uh,
it was a very strong majority of people who voted to bar super
delegates from, uh, casting their,
their own free votes in first ballot in a presidential,
um, convention. So I don't know, it's been a long time since,
uh, uh, uh, it's gone to the second or third ballot, but that, that was a,
a major step forward to make sure that as people are going and casting their
votes in these primaries, that they're not risk being overruled by again,
a group of special individuals who are elected officials who are lobbyists and
who are party officials and people coming from all different backgrounds.
Is there any resistance to getting rid of these super oh yeah.
The resistance was very strong. It was not a given that was gonna pass at all.
People who are very invested in this system. Um.
But it seems like they would have to be invested in keeping the system rigged,
like making it easy to influence elections by having these few people that you
can control, having influence over these people.
These people have massive influence over the results of the election that, so.
It it's, it is it it's,
it's so counterintuitive to what we stand for with our democracy. Yeah.
And I think there is, um, I mean it's a fear of losing power.
I think ultimately is what it comes down to. And you have people who said, Hey,
look, I've given my life to the party. You know,
I've put in all of this time and energy, I'm a volunteer,
I'm doing this and all of that, which all of that is is fine. And it's great,
but that shouldn't, uh, make it so that like, you know, as,
as myself as a superdelegate, I've talked about this, I shouldn't have any,
my vote shouldn't count for more than yours or anyone else else,
and that we should be strengthening and, and, um,
empowering and uplifting the voices of the people rather than saying, well,
this small elite group has way more power than you.
So we'll see what they think about things.
It's so bizarre that that's a part of the system.
It just seems like that's something that should have been eradicated a long time
ago. It should have been now Bernie Sanders had to be fuming. Yeah. I mean that,
from that, and then from finding out the DNC,
actively conspired to have him lose the primary, all of that. Sorry.
One, one last thing on, on the super de is that,
that some of those who support it have said is that it is their job to be able
to save the country in case of people elect someone who isn't good.
<laugh>.
Really, that's hilarious. Yeah. That is a hilarious justification. Oh, you know,
better than the whole country. Yeah. You must be super smart. Yeah.
What kind of test do you have to take?
Take a super delicate <laugh> to become a super delicate,
what do you have to do?
Yeah. It's certainly not a written test. You should. No, it's it's really,
I mean again,
or either you're either an elected member of Congress or you're somebody who the
party chooses.
Wow. The idea that the reason to keep that is because, you know,
better mm-hmm <affirmative>, I mean, that's essentially what they're saying,
you know, better than all the people that voted. Yeah.
So disrespectful too. It's.
Crazy to people. It's really crazy. Yeah.
Hmm. So I mean, that that's been,
I think a pot positive thing that has come through all of this is,
is more people are say, like, you know, I,
I honestly wasn't paying a bunch of attention to super delegates before all of
this. And, and a lot of people had their eyes opened up to say, okay,
this is clearly wrong. Yeah. Why was it there in the first place?
Let's do something to fix the process.
Well, most people don't think until this election,
the public wasn't even aware that that was, that. That was the case. Yeah.
And then when, you know, people find out about it, they go, wait, wait, wait,
what? Yeah. They can just decide to not vote the same way the people voted.
Yeah. And then they, the state can lose or, I mean,
the person can lose the state,
even though 70% of the state voted for that person. Right. That's insane. Yeah.
It is. Did you read Donna Brazil's book?
I didn't read the whole book. I heard I,
I got excerpts excerpts from it and of it.
Um, I was,
I was shocked that they conspired to have Hillary
win the primaries. I was more shocked that more people weren't outraged.
Yeah. What does that tell you?
It tells you that people have sort of resigned to the idea that this is a
corrupt system. Yeah. That they don't have time. I mean,
it goes back to what we're saying earlier that, you know, people are exhausted.
Yeah. Most people mm-hmm <affirmative> most people are exhausted <affirmative>.
And I think that's where you see a lot of,
a lot of the energy that came around for, um,
somebody like Bernie Sanders or somebody like Donald Trump who are perceived as
being not of the system. Yeah.
Whew.
But it, it shows us, it shows where we need to go, honestly.
And you're talking about authentic,
honest leaders who have integrity and, and um,
I think people are not as blind to like, people can tell.
Yeah. People can tell if you're being real or not,
or if you're signing them a false bill of goods.
I think they're better at it now. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Paying more attention. Well, there's.
Also this there's enough footage of people now. That's.
Yeah. Everybody's a reporter now. Yeah.
I mean, it's, uh, it's easy to go back and you say, well,
look at this interview from four years ago. Yeah. When they, uh,
we're completely different. Like what happened? Mm-hmm <affirmative>, I mean,
it's,
there's also calculated maneuvers that people do politically to align themselves
with one group or another where they realize like, okay, there's,
there's a lot of money in being a, a, this that's a that, you know,
there's a lot of money in being a, whatever it is, you know,
Republican or Democrat or there's, there's an angle for success, right.
Yeah. Right. That's um,
all of those different labels and things that people are capitalizing on within
the political world,
I think are the things that are turning off more and more people, right.
To the politics, because then it's like, well,
if you're not branded with this label,
then I'm not gonna talk to you or I'm not gonna have a conversation.
Or it's this camp versus another camp,
this tribe versus another tribe than like recognizing
even amongst our own families and friends and communities, like we,
we figure out ways to talk things through and find ways to collaborate and
areas where we agree. We can agree to disagree on certain things,
but we can do that with, you know,
what we in Hawaii call Aloha and with respect. Yeah.
And actually find a way through to move forward.